ES8388
======

.. seo::
    :description: Instructions for using ESPHome's es8388 audio DAC platform to play media from your devices and to configure microphone inputs.
    :image: es8388.svg
    :keywords: ES8388, Audio, DAC, I2S, ESP32

The ``es8388`` component allows your ESPHome devices to use the es8388 low power audio codec (`datasheet <http://www.everest-semi.com/pdf/ES8388%20DS.pdf>`__)
This allows the playback of audio through two channel high performance audio DAC output via the microcontroller from a range of sources via :doc:`/components/speaker/index` or
:doc:`/components/media_player/index` .

It also allows your ESPHome devices to use the ``es8388``  high performance two channel audio ADC.

This allows attached microphones to be used as a microphone input via :doc:`/components/microphone/i2s_audio`.

The :ref:`I²C bus <i2c>` is required in your configuration as this is used to communicate with the es8388.

Audio DAC
---------

.. code-block:: yaml

    # Example configuration entry
    audio_dac:
     - platform: es8388

Configuration variables:
************************
- **address** (*Optional*, int): The I²C address of the driver. Defaults to ``0x10``.
- **i2c_id** (*Optional*): The ID of the :ref:`I²C bus <i2c>` the ES8388 is connected to.
- All other options from :ref:`Audio DAC <config-audio_dac>`.


Select
------

The ``es8388`` select allows you to control the ``dac output`` and the ``adc input_mic`` of your :doc:`es8388`.

.. code-block:: yaml

    select:
      - platform: es8388
        es8388_id: es8388_parent
        dac_output:
          name: "DAC Output"
        adc_input_mic:
          name: "ADC Input MIC"

Configuration variables:
************************

- **es8388_id** (*Optional*, :ref:`config-id`): Manually specify the ID for the :doc:`es8388` component.
- **dac_output** (*Optional*): Control the DAC Audio output.

  - ``LINE1`` (default)
  - ``LINE2``
  - ``BOTH``

  All options from :ref:`Select <config-select>`.

- **adc_input_mic** (*Optional*): Control the ADC Mic Input.

  - ``LINE1`` (default)
  - ``LINE2``
  - ``DIFFERENCE``

  All options from :ref:`Select <config-select>`.


Automations
-----------

All :ref:`Audio DAC Automations <automations-audio_dac>` are supported by this platform.


Configuration Examples
----------------------

**ESP32 Audio Kit**:

.. code-block:: yaml

    i2c:
      sda: GPIO33
      scl: GPIO32
      frequency: 100kHz
      id: bus_a

    audio_dac:
      - platform: es8388
        id: es8388_dac

    select:
      - platform: es8388
        es8388_id: es8388_dac
        dac_output:
          name: "DAC Output"
        adc_input_mic:
          name: "ADC Input MIC"

    i2s_audio:
      id: i2s_output
      i2s_lrclk_pin: GPIO25
      i2s_bclk_pin: GPIO27
      i2s_mclk_pin: GPIO0

    speaker:
      - platform: i2s_audio
        i2s_audio_id: i2s_output
        sample_rate: 48000
        id: speaker_id
        i2s_dout_pin: GPIO26
        bits_per_sample: 32bit
        dac_type: external
        channel: stereo
        buffer_duration: 100ms
        audio_dac: es8388_dac

    microphone:
      - platform: i2s_audio
        i2s_din_pin: GPIO35
        id: mic1
        adc_type: external
        pdm: false
        sample_rate: 16000
        bits_per_sample: 16bit

    switch:
      - platform: gpio
        pin: GPIO21
        id: mute_switch
        name: "AMP Switch"
        restore_mode: ALWAYS_ON

See Also
--------

- :doc:`index`
- :apiref:`es8388/es8388.h`
- :apiref:`audio_dac/audio_dac.h`
- :ghedit:`Edit`
