---
description: "Instructions for setting up the native ESPHome API for communication with Home Assistant."
title: "Native API Component"
params:
  seo:
    description: Instructions for setting up the native ESPHome API for communication with Home Assistant.
    image: server-network.svg
---



The ESPHome native API is used to communicate with clients directly, with a highly-optimized
network protocol. Currently, only the ESPHome tool, Home Assistant and ioBroker use this native API.

After adding an `api:`   line to your ESPHome configuration you can go to the Home Assistant
web interface and navigate to the "Integrations" screen in the "Configuration" panel. Then wait
for the ESPHome device to show up under the discovered section (can take up to 5 minutes) or add
the device manually by choosing "ESPHome" from the integration overview and entering
"<NODE_NAME>.local" or the IP address of the unit in the "Host" field.

The ESPHome native API is based on a custom TCP protocol using protocol buffers. You can find
the protocol data structure definitions here: [api.proto](https://github.com/esphome/esphome/blob/dev/esphome/components/api/api.proto)
A Python library that implements this protocol is [aioesphomeapi](https://github.com/esphome/aioesphomeapi).

{{< note >}}
**Actions** were previously called **Services**. ESPHome changed the name in line with
[Home Assistant](https://developers.home-assistant.io/blog/2024/07/16/service-actions/)
but will continue to support YAML with `services`   and `homeassistant.service`   for the foreseeable future.
Documentation will only refer to **Actions**.

{{< /note >}}
```yaml
# Example configuration entry
api:

```
```yaml
# Example with more options
api:
  port: 6053
  batch_delay: 50ms  # Reduce latency for real-time applications
  encryption:
    key: "YOUR_ENCRYPTION_KEY_HERE"
  reboot_timeout: 30min

```
## Configuration variables:

- **port** (*Optional*, int): The port to run the API server on. Defaults to `6053`  .
- **encryption** (*Optional*): If present, encryption will be enabled for the API. Using encryption helps to secure the
  communication between the device running ESPHome and the connected client(s).

  - **key** (*Optional*, string): A 32-byte base64-encoded string to be used as the encryption key. If not provided,
    the key may be set at runtime, but **encryption will not be used until it is set.**

    If you need a key, you can use the key below; it is randomly generated by your browser each time this page loads:

{{< api-key-input >}}
{{< note >}}
Support for configuring the encryption key on-the-fly will be implemented in a future release of Home Assistant.

{{< /note >}}
- **actions** (*Optional*, list): A list of user-defined actions. See [User-defined Actions](#api-device-actions).
- **batch_delay** (*Optional*, [Time](#config-time)): The delay time for batching multiple state update messages
  together to reduce network overhead. Lower values send updates sooner but use more network packets,
  while higher values batch more efficiently but add latency. Must be between `0ms`   and `65535ms`
  (65.535 seconds). Defaults to `100ms`  .

{{< note >}}
Setting `batch_delay: 0ms`   enables immediate sending mode for state updates. This is useful for
applications that require real-time responsiveness, such as IR remote binary sensors where rapid
ON→OFF transitions must be preserved. However, this will increase network traffic and may impact
WiFi performance with many rapidly-changing sensors. Only use this setting when necessary.

{{< /note >}}
- **custom_services** (*Optional*, boolean): Enable compilation of custom API services for external components that use the C++ `CustomAPIDevice`   class. Only needed when external components register their own services via the native API. Defaults to `false`  .
- **homeassistant_services** (*Optional*, boolean): Enable compilation of Home Assistant service call support for external components that use the C++ `CustomAPIDevice::call_homeassistant_service()`   or `CustomAPIDevice::fire_homeassistant_event()`   methods. This is automatically enabled when using `homeassistant.service`   or `homeassistant.event`   actions, or the `homeassistant`   platform for number or switch components. Only needs to be manually set when external components call Home Assistant services without using the built-in actions. Defaults to `false`  .
- **homeassistant_states** (*Optional*, boolean): Enable compilation of Home Assistant state subscription support for external components that use the C++ `CustomAPIDevice::subscribe_homeassistant_state()`   method. This is automatically enabled when using any `homeassistant`   platform components (sensor, binary_sensor, text_sensor, switch, or number). Only needs to be manually set when external components subscribe to Home Assistant states without using the built-in components. Defaults to `false`  .
- **reboot_timeout** (*Optional*, [Time](#config-time)): The amount of time to wait before rebooting when no
  client connects to the API. This is needed because sometimes the low level ESP functions report that
  the ESP is connected to the network, when in fact it is not - only a full reboot fixes it.
  Can be disabled by setting this to `0s`  . Defaults to `15min`  .
- **id** (*Optional*, [ID](#config-id)): Manually specify the ID used for code generation.
- **password** (*Optional*, **Deprecated**, string): The password to protect the API Server with. Defaults
  to no password. It is recommended to use the `encryption`   -> `key`   above instead of the the `password`  .
- **on_client_connected** (*Optional*, [Action](#config-action)): An automation to perform when a client
  connects to the API. See [`on_client_connected`   Trigger](#api-on_client_connected_trigger).
- **on_client_disconnected** (*Optional*, [Action](#config-action)): An automation to perform when a client
  disconnects from the API. See [`on_client_disconnected`   Trigger](#api-on_client_disconnected_trigger).

{{< anchor "api-actions" >}}

## Actions

Before using any of the actions below, you'll need to tell Home Assistant to allow your device to
perform actions.

Open the ESPHome integration page on your Home Assistant instance:

{{< button href="https://my.home-assistant.io/redirect/integration/?domain=esphome" img="https://my.home-assistant.io/badges/integration.svg" alt="Open your Home Assistant instance and show an integration." >}}
Then:

#. Find your device in the device list
#. Click the "configure" button next to it
#. Check the "Allow the device to perform Home Assistant actions" box
#. Then click "submit".

{{< anchor "api-homeassistant_event_action" >}}

### `homeassistant.event`   Action

{{< note >}}
Be sure to [follow the instructions above](#api-actions) to tell Home Assistant to allow
your device to perform actions.

{{< /note >}}
When using the native API with Home Assistant, you can create events in the Home Assistant event bus
straight from ESPHome [Automations](#automation).

```yaml
# In some trigger
on_...:
  # Simple
  - homeassistant.event:
      event: esphome.button_pressed
      data:
        message: Button was pressed

```
#### Configuration variables:

- **event** (**Required**, string): The event to create - must begin with `esphome.`
- **data** (*Optional*, mapping): Optional *static* data to pass along with the event.
- **data_template** (*Optional*, mapping): Optional template data to pass along with the event.
  This is evaluated on the Home Assistant side with Home Assistant's templating engine.
- **variables** (*Optional*, mapping): Optional variables that can be used in the `data_template`  .
  Values are [lambdas](#config-lambda) and will be evaluated before sending the request.

{{< anchor "api-homeassistant_action-action" >}}

### `homeassistant.action`   Action

{{< note >}}
Be sure to [follow the instructions above](#api-actions) to tell Home Assistant to allow
your device to perform actions.

{{< /note >}}
When using the native API with Home Assistant, you can perform Home Assistant actions straight from ESPHome [Automations](#automation).

```yaml
# In some trigger
on_...:
  # Simple
  - homeassistant.action:
      action: notify.html5
      data:
        message: Button was pressed
  # With templates and variables
  - homeassistant.action:
      action: notify.html5
      data:
        title: New Humidity
      data_template:
        message: The humidity is {{ my_variable }}%.
      variables:
        my_variable: |-
          return id(my_sensor).state;

```
#### Configuration variables:

- **action** (**Required**, string): The Home Assistant [Action](https://www.home-assistant.io/docs/scripts/service-calls/)
  to perform.
- **data** (*Optional*, mapping): Optional *static* data to perform the action with.
- **data_template** (*Optional*, mapping): Optional template data to perform the action with.
  This is evaluated on the Home Assistant side with Home Assistant's templating engine.
- **variables** (*Optional*, mapping): Optional variables that can be used in the `data_template`  .
  Values are [lambdas](#config-lambda) and will be evaluated before sending the request.

Data structures are not possible, but you can create a script in Home Assistant and call with all
the parameters in plain format.

```yaml
# Home Assistant Configuration
script:
  ...
  set_light_rgb:
    alias: 'ESPHome RGB light set'
    sequence:
    - action: light.turn_on
      data_template:
        entity_id: '{{ light_name }}'
        rgb_color:
        - '{{ red }}'
        - '{{ green }}'
        - '{{ blue }}'

```
Then, in ESPHome:

```yaml
# In some trigger
on_...:
  - homeassistant.action:
      action: script.set_light_rgb
      data:
        light_name: 'my_light'
        red: '255'
        green: '199'
        blue: '71'

```
{{< anchor "api-homeassistant_tag_scanned_action" >}}

### `homeassistant.tag_scanned`   Action

{{< note >}}
Be sure to [follow the instructions above](#api-actions) to tell Home Assistant to allow
your device to make action calls.

{{< /note >}}
When using the native API with Home Assistant, you can push tag_scanned to Home Assistant
straight from ESPHome [Automations](#automation).

```yaml
# In some trigger
on_...:
  # Simple
  - homeassistant.tag_scanned: some-tag

```
#### Configuration variables:

- **tag** (**Required**, [templatable](#config-templatable), string): The id of the scanned tag

## Triggers

{{< anchor "api-on_client_connected_trigger" >}}

### `on_client_connected`   Trigger

This trigger is activated each time a client connects to the API. Two variables of
type `std::string`   are available for use by actions called from within this trigger:

- `client_address`  : the IP address of the client that connected
- `client_info`  : the name of the client that connected

```yaml
api:
  # ...
  on_client_connected:
    - logger.log:
        format: "Client %s connected to API with IP %s"
        args: ["client_info.c_str()", "client_address.c_str()"]

```
{{< anchor "api-on_client_disconnected_trigger" >}}

### `on_client_disconnected`   Trigger

This trigger is activated each time the API disconnects from the API. Two variables of
type `std::string`   are available for use by actions called from within this trigger:

- `client_address`  : the IP address of the client that disconnected
- `client_info`  : the name of the client that disconnected

```yaml
api:
  # ...
  on_client_disconnected:
    - logger.log: "API client disconnected!"

```
{{< anchor "api-connected_condition" >}}

## `api.connected`   Condition

This [Condition](#config-condition) checks if at least one client is connected to the ESPHome
native API. Please note client not only includes Home Assistant, but also ESPHome's OTA log output
if logs are shown remotely.

```yaml
on_...:
  if:
    condition:
      api.connected:
    then:
      - logger.log: API is connected!

```
The lambda equivalent for this is `id(api_id).is_connected()`  .

{{< anchor "api-device-actions" >}}

## User-defined Actions

It is also possible to get data from Home Assistant to ESPHome with user-defined actions.
When you declare actions in your ESPHome YAML file, they will automatically show up in
Home Assistant and you can call them directly.

```yaml
# Example configuration entry
api:
  actions:
    - action: start_laundry
      then:
        - switch.turn_on: relay
        - delay: 3h
        - switch.turn_off: relay

```
For example with the configuration seen above, after uploading you will see an action
called `esphome.livingroom_start_laundry`   (livingroom is the node name) which you can
then call.

Additionally, you can also transmit data from Home Assistant to ESPHome with this method:

```yaml
# Example configuration entry
api:
  actions:
    - action: start_effect
      variables:
        my_brightness: int
        my_effect: string
      then:
        - light.turn_on:
            id: my_light
            brightness: !lambda 'return my_brightness;'
            effect: !lambda 'return my_effect;'

```
Using the `variables`   key you can tell ESPHome which variables to expect from Home Assistant.
For example the action seen above would be executed with something like this:

```yaml
# Example Home Assistant Action
action: esphome.livingroom_start_effect
data_template:
  my_brightness: "{{ states.brightness.state }}"
  my_effect: "Rainbow"

```
Then each variable you define in the `variables`   section is accessible in the automation
triggered by the user-defined action through the name you gave it in the variables section
(note: this is a local variable, so do not wrap it in `id(...)`   to access it).

There are currently 4 types of variables:

- bool: A boolean (ON/OFF). C++ type: `bool`
- int: An integer. C++ type: `int`  /`int32_t`
- float: A floating point number. C++ type: `float`
- string: A string. C++ type: `std::string`

Each of these also exist in array form:

- bool[]: An array of boolean values. C++ type: `std::vector<bool>`
- ... - Same for other types.

## Advantages over MQTT

The ESPHome native API has many advantages over using MQTT for communication with Home
Automation software (currently only Home Assistant and ioBroker). But MQTT is a great protocol and will
never be removed. Features of native API (vs. MQTT):

- **Much more efficient:** ESPHome encodes all messages in a highly optimized format with
  protocol buffers - for example binary sensor state messages are about 1/10 of the size.
- **One-click configuration:** ESPHome just needs one click to set up in Home Assistant -
  no more messing around with retained MQTT discovery messages and alike.
- **One less single point of failure:** In the ESPHome native API each ESP is its own server.
  With MQTT, when the broker shuts off nothing can communicate anymore.
- **Stability:** Since ESPHome has far more control over the protocol than with MQTT,
  it's really easy for us to roll out stability improvements.
- **Low Latency:** The native API is optimized for very low latency, usually this is only
  a couple of milliseconds and far less than can be noticed by the eye.

## See Also

- {{< apiref "api/api_server.h" "api/api_server.h" >}}

