---
description: "Instructions for setting up BL0939 power sensors for the Sonoff Dual R3 v2"
title: "BL0939 Power Sensor"
params:
  seo:
    description: Instructions for setting up BL0939 power sensors for the Sonoff Dual R3 v2
    image: bl0939.png
---

The `bl0939` sensor platform allows you to use your BL0939 voltage/current/power and energy
sensors with ESPHome. This sensor is commonly found in Sonoff Dual R3 v2.

{{< note >}}
SAFETY HAZARD: Some devices such as Sonoff POWs/Shelly/etc, have the digital GND connected directly to mains voltage so **the GPIOs become LIVE during normal operation**. Our advice is to mark these boards to prevent any use of the dangerous digital pins.

{{< /note >}}
As the communication with the BL0939 done using UART, you need
to have an [UART bus](#uart) in your configuration with the `tx_pin` and `rx_pin` connected to the BL0939.
Additionally, you need to set the baud rate to 4800, parity to `NONE` and stop_bits to 2.

```yaml
# Example configuration entry
sensor:
  - platform: bl0939
    voltage:
      name: 'BL0939 Voltage'
    current_1:
      name: 'BL0939 Current 1'
    current_2:
      name: 'BL0939 Current 2'
    active_power_1:
      name: 'BL0939 Active Power 1'
    active_power_2:
      name: 'BL0939 Active Power 2'
    energy_1:
      name: 'BL0939 Energy 1'
    energy_2:
      name: 'BL0939 Energy 2'
    energy_total:
      name: 'BL0939 Energy Total'
```

{{< note >}}
The configuration above should work for Sonoff Dual R3 v2.

{{< /note >}}

## Configuration variables

- **voltage** (*Optional*): Use the voltage value of the sensor in V (RMS).
  All options from [Sensor](#config-sensor).

- **current_1** (*Optional*): Use the current value of the channel 1 in amperes. All options from
  [Sensor](#config-sensor).

- **current_2** (*Optional*): Use the current value of the channel 2 in amperes. All options from
  [Sensor](#config-sensor).

- **active_power_1** (*Optional*): Use the (active) power value of the channel 1 in watts. All options from
  [Sensor](#config-sensor).

- **active_power_2** (*Optional*): Use the (active) power value of the channel 2 in watts. All options from
  [Sensor](#config-sensor).

- **energy_1** (*Optional*): Use the energy counter value of the channel 1 in kWh. All options from
  [Sensor](#config-sensor).

- **energy_2** (*Optional*): Use the energy counter value of the channel 2 in kWh. All options from
  [Sensor](#config-sensor).

- **energy_total** (*Optional*): Use the energy counter value of both channels in kWh. All options from
  [Sensor](#config-sensor).

- **update_interval** (*Optional*, [Time](#config-time)): The interval to check the
  sensor. Defaults to `60s`.

- **uart_id** (*Optional*, [ID](#config-id)): Manually specify the ID of the [UART Component](#uart) if you want
  to use multiple UART buses.

## See Also

- [Sensor Filters](#sensor-filters)
- {{< docref "cse7761/" >}}
- {{< docref "bl0940/" >}}
- {{< apiref "bl0939/bl0939.h" "bl0939/bl0939.h" >}}
